# SIGnaling Network Open Resource (Signor) Reference Ingest Guide (RIG)

---------------

## Source Information

### Infores
 - [infores:signor](https://w3id.org/information-resource-registry/signor)

### Description (o)
SIGNOR 3.0, https://signor.uniroma2.it, is a public repository that captures causal information and represents it according to an ‘activity-flow’ model. SIGNOR provides freely-accessible static maps of causal interactions that can be tailored, pruned and refined to build dynamic and predictive models. Each signaling relationship is annotated with an effect (up/down-regulation) and with the mechanism (e.g. binding, phosphorylation, transcriptional activation, etc.) causing the regulation of the target entity. Since its latest release, SIGNOR has undergone a significant upgrade including: (i) a new website that offers an improved user experience and novel advanced search and graph tools; (ii) a significant content growth adding up to a total of approx. 33,000 manually-annotated causal relationships between more than 8900 biological entities; (iii) an increase in the number of manually annotated pathways, currently including pathways deregulated by SARS-CoV-2 infection or involved in neurodevelopment synaptic transmission and metabolism, among others; (iv) additional features such as new model to represent metabolic reactions and a new confidence score assigned to each interaction.

### Source Category(ies)
Use terms from the enumerated list [here](https://github.com/NCATSTranslator/translator-ingests/blob/main/src/translator_ingest/ingests/rig-instructions.md#source-categoryies).

- Primary Knowledge Provider

### Citation (o)
Prisca Lo Surdo, Marta Iannuccelli, Silvia Contino, Luisa Castagnoli, Luana Licata, Gianni Cesareni, Livia Perfetto, SIGNOR 3.0, the SIGnaling network open resource 3.0: 2022 update, Nucleic Acids Research, Volume 51, Issue D1, 6 January 2023, Pages D631–D637, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac883

### Terms of Use
SIGNOR 3.0 is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International

### Data Access Locations
There are two pages for downloading data files.
 - Signor 3.0 Downloads: https://signor.uniroma2.it/downloads.php  (this page includes file sizes and simple data dictionaries for each download)

### Provision Mechanisms and Formats
- Mechanism(s): File download.
- Formats: csv files.

### Releases and Versioning
 - No consistent cadence for releases, but on average there are 1-2 releases each month.
 - Versioning is based on the month and year of the release
 - Releases page / change log: https://signor.uniroma2.it/downloads.php

----------------

## Ingest Information

### Utility
Signor is a rich source of manually curated genetic  associations to other biological entities which are an important type of edge for Translator query and reasoning use cases, including treatment predictions, gene-gene regulation predictions, and pathfinder queries.  It is one of the sources that focus on drug and genes.

### Scope
This initial ingest of Signor covers curated Gene to Gene associations that report therapeutic and marker/mechanism relationships, and  inferred statistical associations generated by Signor.

### Relevant Files
Source files with content we aim to ingest.

  | File | Location | Description |
  |----------|----------|----------|
  | CTD_chemicals_diseases.tsv.gz  | http://ctdbase.org/downloads/ |  Manually curated and computationally inferred associations between chemicals and diseases |
  | CTD_exposure_events.tsv.gz  | http://ctdbase.org/downloads/ |  Descriptions of statistical studies of how exposure to chemicals affects a particular population, with some records providing outcomes|

### Included Content / Records
Records from the relevant files that are included, and optionally a list of fields in the data that are part of or inform the ingest.

  | File | Included Records | Fields Used (o) |
  |----------|----------|----------|
  | CTD_chemicals_diseases.tsv.gz  | Curated therapeutic and marker/mechanism associations (records where a "DirectEvidence" value is populated with type "T" or "M"), as well as inferred associtionas (recrods lacking a value in the DirectEvidence column)  | ChemicalName, ChemicalID, CasRN, DiseaseName, DiseaseID, DirectEvidence, InferenceGeneSymbol, InferenceScore, OmimIDs, PubMedIDs |

### Filtered Content / Records
Records from relevant files that are not included in the ingest.

  | File | Filtered Records | Rationale |
  |----------|----------|----------|
  | CTD_chemicals_diseases.tsv.gz  | None | Currently taking all records with no publication count or inference score cutoffs - but these may be added in future iterations |


### Future Content Considerations (o)
Content addditions/changes to consider for future iterations (consider edge content node property content, and edge property/EPC content)

- **Edges**
   - While the current ingest includes only Chemical-Disease Asociations, future iterations will include additional types of associations between Chemicals and GO Terms, Molecular Phenotypes, Genes, etc. See the Ingest Survey table linked below for more details.
  - Consider ingesting additional chemical-disease edges reporting statistical correlations from environmental exposure studies from CTD_exposure_events.tsv.gz. This is a unique/novel source for this kind of knowledge, but there is not a lot of data here, and utility is not yet clear.
  - Consider adding some threshold / cutoff to remove lower quality/confidence inferences (e.g. based on shared gene count, publication count, or inference score. At present we include even inferences based on a single shared gene/pub - which is not really meaningful.

- **Node Properties**
  - Molepro ingested chemical properties in its previous ingests - which we will likely bring in at some point.

- **Edge Properties/EPC Metadata**
  - Consider an edge property that reports the list of shared genes supporting C-D inferred associations.


-----------------

##  Target Information

### Infores:
 - infores:translator-ctd-kgx

### Edge Types

|  Subject Category |  Predicate | Object Category | Qualifier Types |  AT / KL  | Edge Properties | UI Explanation |
|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|---------|----------|
| ChemicalEntity | treats_or_applied_or_studied_to_treat | DiseaseOrPhenotypic Feature  |  n/a  |  manual_agent, knowledge_assertion  | publications  |  CTD Chemical-Disease records with a "T" (therapeutic) DirectEvidence code indicate the chemical to be a "potential" treatment in virtue of its clinical use or study - which maps best to the Biolink predicate 'treats_or_applied_or_studied_to_treat'. |
| ChemicalEntity | 'correlates_with_or_contributes_to' | DiseaseOrPhenotypicFeature  |  n/a  |  manual_agent, knowledge_assertion  | publications  |  CTD Chemical-Disease records with an "M" (marker/mechanism) DirectEvidence code indicate the chemical to correlate with or play an etiological role in a condition - which maps best to the Biolink predicate 'correlates_with_or_contributes_to'. |
| ChemicalEntity | 'associated_with' | DiseaseOrPhenotypicFeature  |  n/a  |  data_analysis_pipeline, statisitcal_association  | has_confidence_score, publications |  CTD Chemical-Disease records with an inference score indicate a statistically significant number of shared gene associations that suggest a biological relationship may exist. The statistical basis of this relationship maps to the Biolink 'assocaited_with' predicate. |

**Additional Notes/Rationale (o)**:
- CTD_chemicals_diseases.tsv. data includes one row per curated 'T', or 'M' association with pub reference(s), plus one row per shared gene association with pub reference(s), and inference scores.
   - Separate edges will be created for each type of association reported between a chemical and a given disease, according to the mappings described above.
   - All "shared gene" rows in the source data file for a given C-D pair will be aggregated into a single 'associated_with' edge that reprots an associated_with relationship with the inference score as an edge property (and possibly the list of shared genes).
   - This means that for a given C-D pair in the CTD file, there may be 1, 2, or 3 separate edges created in the Translator graph.
- The 'treats_or_applied_or_studied_to_treat' predicate is used to avoid making too strong a claim, as CTDs definition of its "T" flag is broad ("a chemical that has a known or potential therapeutic role in a disease"), which covered cases where a chemical may formally treat a disease or only have been studied or applied to treat a disease. All edges are manual agent knowledge assertions, as the ingested data is based on manual literature curation.
- The 'correlates_with_or_contributes_to' predicate is used because the CTD 'M' flag does not distinguish between when a chemical is a correlated marker for a condition, or a contributing cause for the condition. All edges are manual agent knowledge assertions, as the ingested data is based on manual literature curation.

### Node Types

High-level Biolink categories of nodes produced from this ingest as assigned by ingestors are listed below - however downstream normalization of node identifiers may result in new/different categories ultimately being assigned.

| Biolink Category |  Source Identifier Type(s) | Node Properties  | Notes |
|------------------|----------------------------|------------------|-------|
| ChemicalEntity |  MeSH  |  none  |Majority are Biolink SmallMolecules |
| DiseaseOrPhenotypicFeature| MeSH | none  |  |

-  The chemical ID row is expected to need a 'MESH:' prefix added, with the disease identifier used as-is.

### Future Modeling Considerations (o)
- Revisit use of 'has_confidence_score' edge property if/when we refactor this part of the Biolink Model
- Revisit 'correlates_with_or_contributes_to' and 'treats_or_studied_or_applied_to_treat' predicates if/when we refactor modeling or conventions here.


-----------------

## Provenance Information (o)

### Ingest Contributors (o)
- **Kevin Schaper**: code author
- **Evan Morris**: code support
- **Sierra Moxon**: code support
- **Vlado Dancik**: code support, domain expertise
- **Matthew Brush**: data modeling, domain expertise

### Artifacts (o)
- [Ingest Survey](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1R9z-vywupNrD_3ywuOt_sntcTrNlGmhiUWDXUdkPVpM/edit?gid=0#gid=0)
- [Ingest Ticket](https://github.com/NCATSTranslator/Data-Ingest-Coordination-Working-Group/issues/23)

### Additional Notes (o)
